Add initial draft of crates policy. (#19)
rust-lang/compiler-team: procedures/crates.md

# Third-party and out-of-tree crates
This document describe the guidelines for creating out-of-tree crates for use in the compiler and
using third-party crates within the compiler. These guidelines were originally discussed at the
Rust All Hands 2019 by the compiler team and others; and then at the

> [01/03/2019 steering meeting][steering_meeting].

Author: This link should be dead until #26 is merged.

that pull requests are reviewed.

### What should these crates be named?
Crate naming will be discussed when new out-of-tree crates are proposed to the compiler team.

Crate naming will differ on a case-by-case basis. Crates that are inherently tied to the
compiler would benefit from a name that is prefixed with `rustc_`. This is an indicator of how
stable the crate may be to prospective users. Other crates, which are more general-purpose, will
have names that are disentangled from the compiler.

### Are there any limitations on the review policy for out-of-tree crates?
Generally, the working groups and team members that are primarily free to maintain the crate using
whatever practices are best suited to their group, however, there are some limitations so that there
is some uniformity across the compiler and out-of-tree crates:

- Every compiler team member must be able to review and approve PRs.
- Where possible, only active participants in the crate (or related working group) need be on the
  highfive rotation for the crate.
- Working group members (or regular contributors to the crate) who cannot approve PRs on rustc can

>   be allowed approve PRs to the crate.

Reviewer: typo: allowed *to* approve

Author: Fixed, thanks!

- Major pull requests should have multiple reviewers.

### What is required of an out-of-tree crate?
It is required that out-of-tree crates must:

> - Be dual-licensed with Apache 2.0 and MIT (as the compiler is) unless otherwise

Reviewer 2: Note, that tidy lint has a source-of-truth list of licenses that are acceptable for external libraries. Perhaps mandate A2.0/MIT only for the crates that are truly a part of compiler (e.g. `rustc_data_structures` as opposed to some generic graph library?)

Author: It looks like that list is almost entirely composed of [combinations of Apache 2.0 and MIT](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/src/tools/tidy/src/deps.rs#L10-L19) with the only exception being unlicense - which I guess I could mention here if we felt it was worth it?

Reviewer 2: I’m somewhat confident that licenses such as ISC would get added there in short order, if it was necessary for a desirable crate. The list is updated on-demand, rather than being an exhaustive list of licenses that we will ever accept.

Author: That's a great point, I've updated the document. Thanks.

that there are clear owners who are responsible for making sure that new versions are published and
that pull requests are reviewed.

### What should these crates be named?
Crate naming will be discussed when new out-of-tree crates are proposed to the compiler team.

Crate naming will differ on a case-by-case basis. Crates that are inherently tied to the
compiler would benefit from a name that is prefixed with `rustc_`. This is an indicator of how
stable the crate may be to prospective users. Other crates, which are more general-purpose, will
have names that are disentangled from the compiler.

### Are there any limitations on the review policy for out-of-tree crates?
Generally, the working groups and team members that are primarily free to maintain the crate using
whatever practices are best suited to their group, however, there are some limitations so that there
is some uniformity across the compiler and out-of-tree crates:

- Every compiler team member must be able to review and approve PRs.
- Where possible, only active participants in the crate (or related working group) need be on the
  highfive rotation for the crate.

> - Working group members (or regular contributors to the crate) who cannot approve PRs on rustc can

Reviewer 3: I found this phrasing unclear. I would say someting like:

It is fine to have additional reviewers on the crate who do not otherwise have r+ for Rust as a whole, if those reviewers are actively involved in the working group or the crate maintenance.

Author: Fixed.

  approve PRs to the crate.
- Major pull requests should have multiple reviewers.

### What is required of an out-of-tree crate?
It is required that out-of-tree crates must:

> - Be dual-licensed with Apache 2.0 and MIT (as the compiler is) or

Reviewer 3: I would stregthened this. I think all compiler-team-maintained crates should be dual-licensed, full stop, unless there is a compelling reason to do so. In that event, this reason should be described (and the license description should be part of the PR proposing the crate to be added).

Author: I've previously [discussed this with @nagisa](https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-team/pull/19#discussion_r261832585). I've strengthened the wording slightly, hopefully striking a balance.

  [any other license][licenses] accepted by tidy, unless otherwise appropriate (ports of code
  from other project, etc).
- Abide by Rust's code of conduct.
- Specify that the crate is maintained by the Rust compiler team and any appropriate working groups.
    - In particular, this should detail the expected level of maintenance and stability for any
      prospective users.
    - This should also link to the working group details in this repository.
- Be added to the list at the bottom of this page.
- Follow semantic versioning.

> - Use `@bors` and `@rust-highfive`.

Reviewer 3: I think we should add a bullet point *somewhere* about using issue labels that are compatible with our triage process. This can be a TBD link, though, since we've not finalized that.

Author: Added.

### Is there a requirement for community infrastructure for an out-of-tree crate?
There is no requirement that community infrastructure (such as Zulip servers/streams) be created for
out-of-tree crates. This may be desirable if an out-of-tree crate gains a large community of
contributors and users, but otherwise, the working group or compiler team streams should be used
initially.

Linkifiers for auto-linking to issues and PRs on the primary Rust Zulip server can be added on
request.

### Are there any recommendations for working with out-of-tree crates?
Recommendations for working with out-of-tree crates will be documented in the rustc-guide, see
[rust-lang/rustc-guide#285][guide_issue] for progress.

[licenses]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/src/tools/tidy/src/deps.rs#L10-L19
[guide_issue]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-guide/issues/285

---

In summary, the process for establishing an out-of-tree crate is as follows:

1. Where appropriate, discuss and confirm the need within the working group for the out-of-tree
   crate.

> 2. Consult with the compiler team to confirm the need for the out-of-tree crate and kick-off the

Reviewer 3: I think we should be more specific about this. I would suggest:

To make the approval official, open a PR modifying this document and use rfcbot fcp. 

However, we'll have to make sure we are integrated with rfcbot fcp on this repository (which should be easy enough to do, I think).

Author: Added.

an email to GitHub is required to resolve this.

[repo_transfers]: https://help.github.com/en/articles/transferring-a-repository

### Who owns these crates?
It is desired that a compiler team member or working group has loose ownership over a crate so
that there are clear owners who are responsible for making sure that new versions are published and
that pull requests are reviewed.

### What should these crates be named?
Crate naming will be discussed when new out-of-tree crates are proposed to the compiler team.

Crate naming will differ on a case-by-case basis. Crates that are inherently tied to the
compiler would benefit from a name that is prefixed with `rustc_`. This is an indicator of how
stable the crate may be to prospective users. Other crates, which are more general-purpose, will
have names that are disentangled from the compiler.

### Are there any limitations on the review policy for out-of-tree crates?
Generally, the working groups and team members that are primarily free to maintain the crate using
whatever practices are best suited to their group, however, there are some limitations so that there
is some uniformity across the compiler and out-of-tree crates:

> - Every compiler team member must be able to review and approve PRs.

Reviewer 4: Note that there are [a lot of other people](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-central-station/blob/master/homu.toml.template) who have r+ rights than the compiler team on rust-lang/rust, for example, the entire language team has r+ in the repo. If we start moving to a out-of-tree crates model under this review policy then presumably a lot of the people in the RCS list would no longer have r+? Is this intentional and why?

Author: (I'm not the person who'd make the final call on this, these are just my thoughts)

I'm not sure how this is any different than other repositories that are out-of-tree, such as cargo, clippy or libc. Only the relevant teams/people have r+ on those repositories. I'm sure there'd be no issue with someone from another team being granted r+ in an out-of-tree crate should it make sense for that to happen. 

It is probably the case that the only reason there isn't a more fine-grained notion of who has r+ on what is because it's hard to do with everything in a single repository. I recognize that there are advantages to everyone with r+ on the repo being able to approve things (e.g. anyone can retry a PR if they notice it has spuriously failed) but I think that "only the team responsible for the crate" is a sane default.

Reviewer 4: rust-lang/rust is a bit special in the sense that "the relevant teams" is much less clear cut because cargo, clippy, libc are all different programs or shippables while the out-of-tree crates I think we are discussing here combine to a single program "rustc". For example, the language team has the say over stabilization of many features and should be able to r+ those PRs.

More importantly, a language team member should be able to r- a PR or at least inform (with e.g. labeling) the compiler-team member who is reviewing a PR that "This PR should not be merged without T-Lang's approval".  This becomes more important when you can change semantics by simply bumping a crates version number. I think changes would be substantially harder to check in this model as compared to the relative ease I have today to skim almost all PRs for problematic things. These are my main concerns here which may perhaps be addressed in other ways...

  in your out-of-tree crate to be discussed during triage meetings.
    - eg. `T-compiler`, `I-nominated` (a full list is to be decided)

### Is there a requirement for community infrastructure for an out-of-tree crate?
There is no requirement that community infrastructure (such as Zulip servers/streams) be created for
out-of-tree crates. This may be desirable if an out-of-tree crate gains a large community of
contributors and users, but otherwise, the working group or compiler team streams should be used
initially.

Linkifiers for auto-linking to issues and PRs on the primary Rust Zulip server can be added on
request.

### Are there any recommendations for working with out-of-tree crates?
Recommendations for working with out-of-tree crates will be documented in the rustc-guide, see
[rust-lang/rustc-guide#285][guide_issue] for progress.

[licenses]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/src/tools/tidy/src/deps.rs#L10-L19
[guide_issue]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-guide/issues/285

---

In summary, the process for establishing an out-of-tree crate is as follows:

1. Where appropriate, discuss and confirm the need within the working group for the out-of-tree
   crate.

> 2. Create a PR modifying this document to include the PR in the list below. Use `@rfcbot fcp` to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Create a PR modifying this document to include the PR in the list below. Use [`@rfcbot merge`](https://github.com/anp/rfcbot-rs#usage) to
```

# Crate Policies
This document describe the guidelines for splitting the compiler up into crates and using
third-party crates in the compiler. These guidelines were originally discussed at the Rust All
Hands 2019 by the compiler team and others.

## Where should compiler crates live?
As library-ification progresses and parts of the compiler are extracted into separate reusable

> crates, these new crates should be hosted in the `rust-lang` organization.

Reviewer: How do we reach consensus that such a crate/repo should be created? I imagine we want to avoid unnecessary churn where repos are created and then deleted again.

Reviewer 5: cc @rust-lang/libs I think the library team should probably weigh in on this policy. e.g., Whether these crates belong in the `rust-lang` org or not?

Reviewer 3: I would certainly like to hear the @rust-lang/libs team opinion. I don't really view the rust-lang GH org as "belonging" to the libs team (nor to any one team), though.

Reviewer 6: I personally would agree that `rust-lang` is the best place for these crates, and like @nikomatsakis don't necessarily think that libs or any one teams own the org, but rather it's for all our use. We'll develop cruft over time, but that's sort of natural and doesn't tend to detract too much from actively developed projects. We can semi-aggressively archive projects that are no longer used or transfer them to other owners.

Reviewer 5: Sorry, I didn't meant to imply any particular ownership stake here. Just wanted to get more visibility on this. In particular, in the past, crates were only supposed to move into `rust-lang` after going through an RFC process. To me, that implied there was a certain minimum standard of quality given to crates in the `rust-lang` repo. I grant that we don't follow this process any more (with an RFC being too heavyweight and preferring more rapid iteration outside of the `rust-lang` orgs altogether, which I think has been very successful), but it would be good, I think, to be more intentional about changing the messaging here. Namely, that "crates in `rust-lang` are no longer necessarily supposed to be high quality, well vetted core crates in the ecosystem, although some may be."

This kind of raises another question here, which is what determines which crates go into `rust-lang` in the first place. Is it just up to each individual team's discretion? If so, that's fine, it would just be good to have that communicated somewhere. (Or maybe it is and I've missed it.)

Author: > Namely, that "crates in rust-lang are no longer necessarily supposed to be high quality, well vetted core crates in the ecosystem, although some may be."

This could be communicated by using GitHub's topics to indicate the team that is responsible for the repository.

Author: I've added some clarifications (based on yesterday's steering meeting) that should address @michaelwoerister's initial concerns with this comment. I'm going to resolve the comment so I can keep track of changes I need to make - perhaps the rest of this discussion would be better suited to Zulip or internals.r-l.o?

## Who owns these crates?
It is desired that a compiler team member has loose ownership over a crate so that there is someone
who is responsible for making sure that new versions are published and that pull requests are
reviewed.

## What should these crates be named?
When naming a crate, it is worth considering that a `rustc_` prefix could result in
compiler-specific changes being made where this isn't appropriate as the crate was actually

> intended to be general-purpose.

Author: Discussion about wording of this section [from steering meeting](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/131828-t-compiler/topic/steering.20meeting.202019.2E03.2E01/near/159722828).

## What should be included in a out-of-tree crate?

> A maintenance policy should be included to set appropriate expectations for anyone who may wish to

Reviewer: Is there a link to an example that could be added here?

Author: I've added a small example.

use the crate. This enables killing dead code, and being able to make changes on a whim, where
appropriate, when this is required by a change in the compiler.

> Various other infrastructure should be put in place, such as `bors-ng` and `highfive`,  to ensure

Reviewer: Is there a link to a guide that could be added here?

Author: I've added a small checklist with as much information as I've got available just now as to how this process would work.

> Various other infrastructure should be put in place, such as `bors-ng` and `highfive`,  to ensure

Reviewer 7: Maybe homu instead of bors-ng? So that the syntax is the same and it can integrate better with our infra (I plan to integrate bors permissions with the team repo in the future).

that the process is similar for in-tree and out-of-tree pull requests. Similarly, integration tests

> should be run in CI and performance measured by `perf.rust-lang.org`. It may be worth consulting

Reviewer: How would performance tracking on perf.rlo work? Currently at least perf.rlo can only benchmark the entire compiler.

Author: I've removed the mention of perf.rlo as I'm not sure it is relevant right now.
